Add sleep and page.waitForTimeout doc to v0.52 & v0.53 (#1743)
grafana/k6-docs: docs/sources/v0.52.x/using-k6-browser/recommended-practices/simulate-user-input-delay.md

description: 'A guide on how to simulate user input delay.'
weight: 04
---

We will demonstrate how best to work with `sleep` in `k6` and the various `wait*` prepended methods that are available in `k6/browser` to simulate user input delay, wait for navigations, and wait for element state changes. By the end of this page, you should be able to successfully use the correct API where necessary.

{{< admonition type="note" >}}

While using the `sleep` or `page.waitForTimeout` functions to wait for element state changes may seem helpful, it's best to avoid them to prevent flakey tests. Instead, it's better to use the other `wait*` prepended methods listed on this page.

{{< /admonition >}}

# What is `sleep`?

[sleep](https://grafana.com/docs/k6/<K6_VERSION>/javascript-api/k6/sleep) is a first class function built into k6. It's main use is to _"suspend VU execution for the specified duration"_ which is most useful when you want to simulate user input delay, such as:

- Navigating to a page.
- Sleeping for a 1 second, which is to simulate a user looking for a specific element on the page.
- Clicking on the element.
- etc.

{{< admonition type="warning" >}}

> `sleep` is a synchronous function that blocks the JS event loop, which means that all asynchronous work will also be suspended until the `sleep` completes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`sleep` is a synchronous function that blocks the JavaScript event loop, which means that all asynchronous work will also be suspended until `sleep` completes.
```

> The browser module predominantly provides asynchronous APIs, and so it's best to avoid working with `sleep`, and instead **we recommend you use [page.waitForTimeout](#pagewaitfortimeout)**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The browser module predominantly provides asynchronous APIs, so it's best to avoid working with `sleep`. Instead, _use the [page.waitForTimeout](#pagewaitfortimeout) function_.
```

We use italic for emphasis, and bold for UI elements. :D

{{< /admonition >}}

# What is `wait*`?

In the browser modules there are various asynchronous APIs that can be used to wait for certain states:

| Method                                           | Description                                                                   |
| ------------------------------------------------ | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| [page.waitForFunction](#pagewaitforfunction)     | Waits for the given function to return a truthy value.                        |
| [page.waitForLoadState](#pagewaitforloadstate)   | Waits for the specified page life cycle event.                                |
| [page.waitForNavigation](#pagewaitfornavigation) | Waits for the navigation to complete after one starts.                        |
| [locator.waitFor](#locatorwaitfor)               | Wait for the element to be in a particular state.                             |

> | [page.waitForTimeout](#pagewaitfortimeout)       | Waits the given time. **Use this instead of `sleep` in your frontend tests.** |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| [page.waitForTimeout](#pagewaitfortimeout)       | Waits the given time. _Use this instead of `sleep` in your frontend tests_. |
```

## page.waitForFunction

> [page.waitForFunction](https://grafana.com/docs/k6/<K6_VERSION>/javascript-api/k6-browser/page/waitforfunction) is useful when you want more control over when a test progresses with a javascript function that returns true when a condition (or many conditions) is met. It can be used to poll for changes in the dom or non dom elements and variables.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[page.waitForFunction](https://grafana.com/docs/k6/<K6_VERSION>/javascript-api/k6-browser/page/waitforfunction) is useful when you want more control over when a test progresses with a javascript function that returns true when a condition (or many conditions) is met. It can be used to poll for changes in the DOM or non-DOM elements and variables.
```

{{< code >}}

<!-- eslint-skip-->

```javascript
import { browser } from 'k6/browser';
import { check } from 'k6';

export const options = {
  scenarios: {
    browser: {
      executor: 'shared-iterations',
      options: {
        browser: {
          type: 'chromium',
        },
      },
    },
  },
};

export default async function () {
  const page = await browser.newPage();

  try {
    // Setting up the example that will mutate the h1 element by setting the
    // h1 elements text value to "Hello".
    await page.evaluate(() => {
      setTimeout(() => {
        const el = document.createElement('h1');
        el.innerHTML = 'Hello';
        document.body.appendChild(el);
      }, 1000);
    });

    // Waiting until the h1 element has mutated.
    const ok = await page.waitForFunction("document.querySelector('h1')", {
      polling: 'mutation',
      timeout: 2000,
    });

    const innerHTML = await ok.innerHTML();
    check(ok, { 'waitForFunction successfully resolved': innerHTML == 'Hello' });
  } finally {
    await page.close();
  }
}
```

{{< /code >}}

## page.waitForLoadState

> [page.waitForLoadState](https://grafana.com/docs/k6/<K6_VERSION>/javascript-api/k6-browser/page/waitforloadstate) is useful when there’s no explicit navigation, but you need to wait for the page or network to settle. This is mainly used when working with single page applications or when no full page reloads happen.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[page.waitForLoadState](https://grafana.com/docs/k6/<K6_VERSION>/javascript-api/k6-browser/page/waitforloadstate) is useful when there’s no explicit navigation, but you need to wait for the page or network to settle. This is mainly used when working with single-page applications or when no full page reloads happen.
```

{{< code >}}

```javascript
import { check } from 'k6';
import { browser } from 'k6/browser';

export const options = {
  scenarios: {
    browser: {
      executor: 'shared-iterations',
      options: {
        browser: {
          type: 'chromium',
        },
      },
    },
  },
};

export default async function () {
  const page = await browser.newPage();

  try {
    // Goto a SPA
    await page.goto('<url>');

    // ... perform some actions that reload part of the page.

    // waits for the default `load` event.
    await page.waitForLoadState();
  } finally {
    await page.close();
  }
}
```

{{< /code >}}

## page.waitForNavigation

> [page.waitForNavigation](https://grafana.com/docs/k6/<K6_VERSION>/javascript-api/k6-browser/page/waitfornavigation) is a very useful API when performing other actions that could start a page navigation, and they don't automatically wait for a navigation to end. Usually you'll find it in our examples with a `click` API call. Note that [goto](https://grafana.com/docs/k6/<K6_VERSION>/javascript-api/k6-browser/page/goto) is an example of an API that **doesn't** require `waitForNavigation` since it will automatically wait for the navigation to complete before returning.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[page.waitForNavigation](https://grafana.com/docs/k6/<K6_VERSION>/javascript-api/k6-browser/page/waitfornavigation) is a very useful API when performing other actions that could start a page navigation, and they don't automatically wait for the navigation to end. Usually, you'll find it in our examples with a `click` API call. Note that [goto](https://grafana.com/docs/k6/<K6_VERSION>/javascript-api/k6-browser/page/goto) is an example of an API that _doesn't_ require `waitForNavigation` since it will automatically wait for the navigation to complete before returning.
```

It's important to call this in a [Promise.all](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Promise/all) along with the API that will cause the navigation to start.

{{< code >}}

```javascript
import { check } from 'k6';
import { browser } from 'k6/browser';

export const options = {
  scenarios: {
    browser: {
      executor: 'shared-iterations',
      options: {
        browser: {
          type: 'chromium',
        },
      },
    },
  },
};

export default async function () {
  const page = await browser.newPage();

  try {
    await page.goto('https://test.k6.io/my_messages.php');

    await page.locator('input[name="login"]').type('admin');
    await page.locator('input[name="password"]').type('123');

    const submitButton = page.locator('input[type="submit"]');

    // The click action will start a navigation, and the waitForNavigation
    // will help the test wait until the navigation completes.
    await Promise.all([page.waitForNavigation(), submitButton.click()]);
  } finally {
    await page.close();
  }
}
```

{{< /code >}}

## locator.waitFor

> [locator.waitFor](https://grafana.com/docs/k6/<K6_VERSION>/javascript-api/k6-browser/locator/waitfor/) will wait until the element meets the waiting criteria. It's useful when dealing with dynamic websites where elements may take time to appear or change state (they might load after some delay due to async calls, JavaScript execution, etc.).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[locator.waitFor](https://grafana.com/docs/k6/<K6_VERSION>/javascript-api/k6-browser/locator/waitfor/) will wait until the element meets the waiting criteria. It's useful when dealing with dynamic websites where elements may take time to appear or change state. For example, if elements load after some delay due to async calls, or because of slow JavaScript execution.
```

We usually avoid using parenthesis and etc., so I tried to rewrite it a bit. Does this still make sense? 🤓

{{< code >}}

```js
import { browser } from 'k6/browser';

export const options = {
  scenarios: {
    browser: {
      executor: 'shared-iterations',
      options: {
        browser: {
          type: 'chromium',
        },
      },
    },
  },
};

export default async function () {
  const page = await browser.newPage();

  await page.goto('https://test.k6.io/browser.php');
  const text = page.locator('#input-text-hidden');
  await text.waitFor({
    state: 'hidden',
  });
}
```

{{< /code >}}

## page.waitForTimeout

> [page.waitForTimeout](https://grafana.com/docs/k6/<K6_VERSION>/javascript-api/k6-browser/page/waitfortimeout) will wait the given amount of time. It's functionally the same as k6's [sleep](#What-is-`sleep`) but it is asynchronous which means it will not block the event loop, thus allowing the background tasks to continue to be worked on. We're also planning on instruementing it with tracing to then allow us visualize it in the timeline in grafana cloud k6.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[page.waitForTimeout](https://grafana.com/docs/k6/<K6_VERSION>/javascript-api/k6-browser/page/waitfortimeout) will wait the given amount of time. It's functionally the same as k6's [sleep](#What-is-`sleep`), but it's asynchronous, which means it will not block the event loop and allows the background tasks to continue to be worked on.
```

Small edit, we try to avoid putting future plans in the docs. They can get outdated, or in case plans change and we create expectations for users about future features.

Alternatively, we could link to a specific GitHub issue here that includes future work.

{{< code >}}

<!-- eslint-skip-->

```javascript
import { browser } from 'k6/browser';
import { check } from 'k6';

export const options = {
  scenarios: {
    browser: {
      executor: 'shared-iterations',
      options: {
        browser: {
          type: 'chromium',
        },
      },
    },
  },
};

export default async function () {
  const page = await browser.newPage();

  try {
    // Setting up the example that will mutate the h1 element by setting the
    // h1 elements text value to "Hello".
    await page.evaluate(() => {
      setTimeout(() => {
        const el = document.createElement('h1');
        el.innerHTML = 'Hello';
        document.body.appendChild(el);
      }, 1000);
    });

    // Waiting until the h1 element has mutated.
    const ok = await page.waitForFunction("document.querySelector('h1')", {
      polling: 'mutation',
      timeout: 2000,
    });

    const innerHTML = await ok.innerHTML();

>     check(ok, { 'waitForFunction successfully resolved': innerHTML == 'Hello' });

Reviewer 2: I'd use the async `check` for consistency.

Author: Thanks, resolved in 989d65178c228ea3a835d60151e29bae676eca39

  } finally {
    await page.close();
  }
}
```

{{< /code >}}

## page.waitForLoadState

[page.waitForLoadState](https://grafana.com/docs/k6/<K6_VERSION>/javascript-api/k6-browser/page/waitforloadstate) is useful when there’s no explicit navigation, but you need to wait for the page or network to settle. This is mainly used when working with single-page applications or when no full page reloads happen.

{{< code >}}

```javascript

> import { check } from 'k6';

Reviewer 2: This import doesn't look necessary.

Author: Thanks, resolved in 989d65178c228ea3a835d60151e29bae676eca39

      },
    },
  },
};

export default async function () {
  const page = await browser.newPage();

  try {
    // Goto a SPA
    await page.goto('<url>');

    // ... perform some actions that reload part of the page.

    // waits for the default `load` event.
    await page.waitForLoadState();
  } finally {
    await page.close();
  }
}
```

{{< /code >}}

## page.waitForNavigation

[page.waitForNavigation](https://grafana.com/docs/k6/<K6_VERSION>/javascript-api/k6-browser/page/waitfornavigation) is a very useful API when performing other actions that could start a page navigation, and they don't automatically wait for the navigation to end. Usually, you'll find it in our examples with a `click` API call. Note that [goto](https://grafana.com/docs/k6/<K6_VERSION>/javascript-api/k6-browser/page/goto) is an example of an API that _doesn't_ require `waitForNavigation` since it will automatically wait for the navigation to complete before returning.

It's important to call this in a [Promise.all](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/JavaScript/Reference/Global_Objects/Promise/all) along with the API that will cause the navigation to start.

{{< code >}}

```javascript

> import { check } from 'k6';

Reviewer 2: This import doesn't look necessary.

Author: Thanks, resolved in 989d65178c228ea3a835d60151e29bae676eca39
